Today we're going to continue to talk about a cell communication.
And I'm going to talk about,
take sort of the general concepts that we talked about last time and talk about
how they apply in,
in to,
uh,
to physiological systems,
the nervous system first,
and then the immune system.
And this is a,
uh,
a lead in to what we'll talk about next week.
We're going to start talking about,
um,
about vaccines,
which is really,
um,
really sort of applied immunology,
trying to take a immunological concepts and put them into action or to engineer
them in some way.
And so we'll talk about that next time.
So,
um,
what I want to start with the,
uh,
with a nervous system,
and this is a,
this is a picture of a neuron.
Um,
this is,
this particular neuron has been filled with a fluorescent dye so that it's so
that it's colored,
uh,
green.
And I'm using it just to make the point,
uh,
which you already know about that.
Uh,
the nervous system is a complex in,
it performs a complex set of functions and it's able to do that because there
are cells like this particular cell that have shapes that are suited to their
function.
And in this case,
the shape is there's a cell body in the center here.
So this is where the nucleus is and where all the transcription production of
proteins that take place here.
And then around this cell body,
there's,
there's an elaborate set of processes which extend out from the cell body and
they go in various directions.
And if you look throughout the nervous system,
you would,
you would find cells that look different in different regions because of where
they're situated in the brain.
But they'd all have some of the same features that is a cell body with many
processes that meet in the cell body.
Now what this enables these cells to do is to communicate with very specific
other regions of the nervous system.
So this cell,
wherever it's setting,
what's,
say,
wherever it is positioned within the nervous system,
let's say it's in the,
in the Cortex,
some whale where or the the outside surface of the brain is able to communicate
with a region of the brain that's in this direction or region in this direction
or region in this direction or region in this direction.
And so,
so one way that,
uh,
that neurons in particular are able to communicate with other cells in the
nervous system,
share information,
integrate information,
decide what to do next is that they are physically connected to other different
cells.
And so part of the complexity of the nervous system is the complexity of this
interconnection of cells.
Now,
if we look at this schematically and so again,
this is the schematic.
It doesn't represent any particular,
uh,
particular neuron in the body but just meant to represent as functions that all
of them have.
Here is the cell body up at the top of the diagram here.
And you could,
you could distinguish,
uh,
between some properties of these processes that extend out in that most of them
are what are called dendrites.
And one of these processes,
especially one is called the Axon.
And the way this cell works as an information processing unit is that the
dendrites which extend out in all these different directions are receiving
information from other cells which is integrated at the position of the cell
body.
And then that integrate and then that information,
that integrated information is passed on to another cell through the Axon.
And so information flows from the dendrites through the cell body,
uh,
down the Axon.
And uh,
that's what this Arrow at the,
um,
at the right shows the direction of the flow of information.
And we're going to talk in in some detail,
not a very high level of detail,
but it's some in some detail about how this communication takes place between
cells and how the information is passed down one of these cells,
uh,
today.
So some,
um,
terminology,
some of which I've already given you cell body,
dendrites,
axons.
If this is the particular kind of Axon that is myelinated than it might have,
uh,
a,
a layer of,
of a,
a special substance called Myelin,
uh,
in she thing the Axon.
And that just allows information to move more quickly from one end of the cell
to the other.
And that can be important because in some cases these,
these processes are very long right there.
There are processes that go from my nervous system,
from my brain and spinal cord out to the,
out to the tips of my fingers that allow me to move muscles.
They are down to your toes.
And so these cells can be many,
many feet long.
These processes can,
well the,
the mechanism that the cell uses to transmit information along its self along
this process,
which goes from my brain to my fingers,
for example,
is through an electrical signal called an action potential.
And we're not going to talk about this in great detail.
There's some detail in your book if you go on,
uh,
to take,
particularly the course that's offered here called physiological systems.
Uh,
you'll learn a lot about action potentials.
And what the mechanisms for generating them are and,
and but I'm only going to say a few words here to sort of uh,
to sort of orient you in the,
the subject.
But all membranes are,
are um,
yeah,
electrically charged.
They,
they carry a potential that is,
if you could,
if you had a tiny,
tiny electrical meter and you could,
and you could put one electrode on one side of the cell membrane on the
extracellular side and one on the intracellular side and measure,
you would measure a potential difference and just like a battery,
you'd measure it potential difference.
And that potential difference is generated by the movement of Ions,
principally sodium and potassium across the membrane.
Now sodium,
potassium don't know ordinarily move across membranes,
right?
They're charged molecules.
They can't dissolve,
they can't permeate through a cell membrane,
but they go through because there are channels that allow them to pass through
in the membrane.
And so all cell membranes have these channels within them and under their
resting conditions,
sodium is moving from outside to inside.
Potassium's moving from inside to outside and because there are ions moving back
and forth,
there's a current that flows and there's a electrical potential that's
generated.
Now this is in the resting state of all cells.
There's some membrane potential and neurons have this resting meant memory in
potential also.
And if you measured it for most cells it's about,
you know,
between minus 60 and minus and minus 90 millivolts.
And for this particular cell here,
it looks like it's about minus 75 millivolts.
Okay.
So the inside of the cell is a little bit more negative than the outside.
Now what happens during an action potential is that that membrane potential
changes very rapidly and,
and it,
it changes from being negative to being more positive.
Yeah.
And that change happens because something gets triggered in the membrane.
And what gets triggered is a voltage gated sodium channel,
which is shown here.
And I remember we talked about these last time.
Voltage gated channels are channels that would allow the passage of sodium in
this case,
but they can exist in two states,
a close state and an open state.
And when an action potential is initiated,
these ion channels go from there close date to their open state when they open,
sodium can now pass through the balance of sodium movement relative to potassium
movement changes because there's this resting movement of all these molecules
anyway.
But that balance dramatically when these iron a gated,
when these gated ion channels open and that results in a dramatic change in the
membrane voltage,
the potential across the membrane,
and that's shown here by this rapid rise in membrane potential.
Now that rapid rise is called depolarization and the membrane is said to be in a
depolarized state because it's less polarized or less negatively charged,
read,
polarized as negatively charged.
It's less negatively charged a than it is in its resting state.
Okay,
so that happens and if I was looking at a region of membrane that was
experiencing an action potential,
I would see a voltage change and just the way it's shown in this graph here now,
if,
if that,
if that potential changed and it's stayed changed forever,
then the cell would never go back to its resting state.
And that would be,
you could have a cell that did that,
but that would be a cell that could only send one signal,
right?
It sends its signal,
it's signal,
the signal that it sends is this change in voltage and once it changes,
maybe it's all done.
And that would be a bad design for our nervous system where we want to use cells
over and over again.
So they're able to recover from this change in potential.
And that's shown functionally here.
But recovery means that this sodium channel becomes closed again.
Now it's more complicated than that because it's not just sodium channels that
are involved.
There are potassium channels also and the,
the uh,
the interplay between sodium channels,
opening of potassium channels opening.
This is described in some detail in your book.
We're not going to talk about those details in the class here.
I want you to sort of understand this really at the level that I've described it
here,
that there's a local change in the membrane.
That local change involves opening of channels that allow ions to pass through
regions where they couldn't pass through before.
That results in a change in voltage and that voltage moves from one end of the
cell to the other.
That action potential is initiated here,
up in this region.
This part of the cell becomes depolarized because it,
because it gets the message that it's supposed to be polarized because of all
the inputs that impinge on these dendrites.
Okay?
Right?
So it's collecting information from all these dendrites under the right series
of signals.
The cell body integrates.
All that information says time for me to fire an action potential that happens.
Okay,
that membrane potential changes here and the change in membrane potential here
is so dramatic that it changes the membrane potential here and here and here.
And that change potential flows down the surface of the axon eventually reaching
this output region.
So the flow of information is really a flow of electrical potential and it goes
in one direction only.
It goes from the region of the cell where the dendrites are down through the
Axon.
We're gonna come back and talk about the action potential a little bit more when
we talk about how the heart works because the heart,
when it's a contracting,
the muscle cells also use action potentials to initiate contraction,
right?
And,
uh,
and when we measure Ekg,
Geez,
what we're measuring is the activity of all these cells within our heart
performing action potentials.
Now in the heart action potential is moving from one heart muscle cell to
another.
Over the surface of the heart.
In the brain action potentials are moving down processes,
uh,
down to single cell process,
for example.
So a,
so action potentials are used by tissues in different ways to send signals from
one cell to another or from one end of one cell to another end of the cell.
That's it.
It makes sense.
So we'll come back to this in our example,
in the cardiovascular system when we're talking about the heart and we'll talk
about how to measure a collective group of action potentials using EKG and well,
you'll actually get to measure,
um,
EKG is on each other,
uh,
during a section that week.
We talk about that.
Well,
what happens when the signal gets to the end of the,
of the Axon?
How do,
how do cells pass the signal from themselves to the next cell in the heart?
It turns out that the cells of the heart are electrically coupled together.
So if an action potential moves down this sell,
it directly moves into the next sale.
And so there's a continuum of electrical connection in the heart that allows an
action potential to sweep across the surface of the heart and for the heart to
beat in a coordinated fashion in the nervous system.
It doesn't work that way and it doesn't work that way for a variety of reasons.
But the main reason is that you want some decision to be made at each space
between two cells,
right?
You want decisions to be made there so you,
so you need some additional mechanism for decision making at the point of
contact between the Axon of one cell and the dendrite of another.
Well that specialized region.
Now in this diagram here,
this is the Axon of one cell.
The first cell in a sequence and that acts on meets the dendrite of another cell
and a special region called a synapse.
And the synapses,
just this anatomical region of contact between two adjacent cells in the nervous
system.
And it varies in its structure among cells of the nervous system,
but all but,
but all synapsis have some properties in common.
One is that there's a physical space in between the two cells.
So the Axon of what's called the presynaptic neuron or the neuron that's
bringing a signal into the synapse,
the Axon terminal,
it's physically separated from the dendright of the next cell.
Okay.
And that space is about 20 to 40 nanometers.
It's not a very big space,
but it's a significant space and it's called the synaptic cleft and it's filled
with extra cellular fluid.
Now another thing that you'd find if you looked inside the axon terminals of any
of these pre synaptic membranes,
you'd find lots of vesicles or small membrane bound compartments that contain
special chemicals called neurotransmitters.
And Neuro transmitters are molecules you've heard of like Acetylcholine,
uh,
like a dopamine,
like serotonin.
They're small molecules that,
uh,
that whose principal function in the body is to carry signals from one cell in
the nervous system to another.
Now,
how they carry signals is that these neurotransmitters act as lie gans.
And when an action potential comes down,
this presynaptic Axon,
when it reaches this point here,
it sets off the process of these vesicles dumping their context into the
synaptic cleft.
So this process,
which is shown schematically here as a vesicle fusing with the cell membrane and
then dropping,
it's,
it's a neurotransmitter only happens when an action potential reaches the end of
the Axon.
So neurotransmitter release is stimulated by the electrical activity that
reaches the end of the Axon.
When these vesicles dumped their contents contents into the synaptic cleft,
the concentration of these lie gans rise.
And another characteristic of the synapse is that the postsynaptic membrane.
Yeah.
The postsynaptic membrane,
the membrane of the cell,
which is going to receive the signal has receptors on it.
And those receptors,
some fraction of them are specific for the lie gand that the presynaptic cell
releases.
Yeah,
it's a lot of words here.
Long words,
presynaptic postsynaptic.
But,
uh,
pre post you get idea,
Kaitlin,
I'm just curious before
this map where things don't,
they're,
they're actually stored in these bicycles and so,
and they,
they,
they get into the vesicles in a variety of different ways.
In some cells they're recycled.
That is the sales able to take up the neurotransmitter after it's released and
restore it.
But most often there are enzyme systems inside the presynaptic membrane where
those neurotransmitters are synthesized,
they're synthesized,
they're packaged into vesicles and then they're just waiting.
And so if you looked,
if,
if you could look inside a,
a pre synaptic,
um,
axon terminal,
you would find one of the characteristics is that that is loaded with these
vesicles and they're just sitting there waiting to receive an action potential
so that they can immediately dump their contents.
And so one of the things you know about the nervous system is fast,
right?
I decided to move,
I can move right away.
And,
and so in order to have fast transmission,
you do that by transmitting electrical signals.
That happens pretty quickly.
You're right.
You know,
you turn on your lamp.
It happens pretty fast because because current can flow very quickly through
wire or through a charged a solution of ions.
So that process happens fast.
But you also need this neurotransmitter
release and activation to happen fast so that you can have rapid activity.
Did I then answer?
So now in this cartoon here I've shown a variety of different receptors and just
to show,
uh,
did,
just to remind you of the different families of receptor molecules that could be
involved in receiving and translating a signal.
Uh,
but in general for each neurotransmitter that released,
there'd only be one population of receptors.
It's ready to receive it.
And in some cases it might be a re a ligand gated ion channel.
And wouldn't that be convenient,
right?
Because if it was,
if it was a neurotransmitter activated ion channel,
what would happen when the neurotransmitter bound here is it would generate an
electrical signal because it would you open the ion channel and you would allow
ion fluxes and you would change the membrane potential in just the way I
described for the action potential.
So this is a mechanism by which an electrical signal comes here.
It gets translated into a chemical signal,
the chemical diffuses across the gap and reinitiate a chemist,
an electrical signal in the next cell.
And that's one way that it happens.
It can also happen,
uh,
in other ways it could be a g protein coupled receptor we should talk about last
time,
which indirectly activates another ion channel to start the electrical signal.
So why do this?
Well,
one reason to do this is because on each post synaptic neuron,
there might be many axons coming together at once and each one might be
generating a different kind of signal,
right through maybe even different neurotransmitters.
And so because this post synaptic neuron is going to be receiving different
signals from different cells,
it's decision about what to do next.
And the what to do next is either create an action potential or not create an
action potential.
So it makes a binary decision.
Either I create an action potential or I don't.
But that decision could be based on many inputs,
right?
Not just on input from one cell.
And it could be the integration of many different chemical signals.
And because of that,
because they're not directly wired together,
but because there is our decisions and integrations occurring at each junction,
uh,
the,
the potential operation of the nervous system becomes diverse,
right?
So you have both a diversity in the physical connections,
Anyone's cell is potentially contacting lots of other cells and you have a
diversity and the chemical changes that occur as a result of any of those
connections.
And that's what leads to some of the complexity of function of the nervous
system.
And when I talk about the immune system for the rest of the time here,
and,
and again,
the point today is not for you to understand in detail all these mechanisms,
but to understand how those basic concepts we talked about last time,
uh,
basic concepts of cell communication,
if arranged in the right kinds of ways,
can lead to complex outcomes.
Right?
That's,
that was the point I was trying to illustrate in the nervous system,
in the immune system.
You could think of it as an even more complex set of outcomes that occur.
And the outcomes that occur are,
um,
are,
uh,
protective outcomes in general.
Our immune system's function is to,
uh,
keep us healthy in the face of an environment where there are lots of things
that could potentially harm us.
And so the study of immunology is the study of mechanisms that your body uses to
protect itself from mainly from foreign pathogens like viruses and bacteria.
And so some words that are useful in this discussion.
A host,
a host is the organism that you're interested in defending.
And it could be you or me or,
uh,
or some typical,
person.
Uh,
foreign is then any molecule or set of molecules or substances that are foreign
to the host.
They don't belong there.
So could be a foreign,
uh,
foreign proteins from a virus could be,
could be a foreign,
uh,
foreign,
um,
elements from a bacterium.
It could be that one of your cells has become mutated,
is now abnormal.
And so doesn't belong in you anymore.
It's,
it's,
it's foreign,
right?
It's not part of the host or not a normal part of the host.
So all those things would be considered foreign.
And we're going to use this special word antigen.
An antigen has a very particular meaning.
It's molecules or pieces of molecules,
often derived from foreign pathogens which stimulate an immune response,
right?
So antigens are molecules or pieces of molecules that stimulate an immune
response.
Any molecule can be an antigen.
The food that you eat is full of antigens,
right?
Microbes that try to,
uh,
to try to live in your body are full of antigens.
Pieces of your own cells are antigens as well.
They're just antigens that belonged to you.
And so you don't normally,
you don't normally mount an immune response to antigens that are part of you.
And we'll talk about how that happens a little bit as we go through here.
So in general,
you think about the immune system protecting against different classes of
pathogens and uh,
and uh,
several classes of pathogens are shown on this,
uh,
on this table.
And so you're familiar with some of these bacteria like Salmonella or the
mycobacterium that causes tuberculosis,
um,
are shown here.
Uh,
viruses,
you know,
about viruses,
uh,
very yola we're going to talk about next week,
which causes smallpox,
influenza,
flu,
which causes the flu and HIV of course,
which causes aids are some examples,
a fun guy,
which don't often cause,
uh,
cause,
um,
infections in people with healthy immune systems but can under some
circumstances and can be tremendous problems in patients that have,
uh,
that have weakened immune systems and parasitic,
a parasitic,
um,
organisms like protozoa and worms,
which are,
um,
which can cause a terrible diseases.
Malaria is one that causes much disease worldwide.
Uh,
schistosomiasis,
uh,
which is a worm that lives in,
in a river waters,
uh,
causes a terrible diseases,
that are still prevalent in many parts of the world.
Uh,
so just a,
an introduction to the classes of,
of,
of potential foreign invaders that our immune system tries to defend us against.
And because it's working to defend us against many different kinds of potential,
uh,
assaults.
Uh,
the immune system has a diverse repertoire of responses that uses,
uh,
in the face of these assaults.
And so one kind of response is called the innate response.
And innate means that it's present from the beginning,
right?
So this is an immune response that doesn't have to be activated.
And we're used to thinking about immune risk responses that have to be
activated,
right?
You get a,
you get a vaccine for chicken pox,
it gets injected and sometime later you're going to be protected against it,
right?
Or you get a cold,
The cold virus,
uh,
takes hold,
the viruses start replicating inside of you,
and it takes some time for immune system to gear up to eliminated,
right?
So we're used to thinking about responses that take some time,
but innate responses are there from the very beginning and they can,
uh,
they can fight,
um,
uh,
against foreign pathogens immediately.
And it's mainly,
these functions are mainly performed by a set of cells called macrophages,
neutrophils and natural killer cells,
which are circulating throughout your body all the time,
ready to destroy anything that they recognize as not part of you.
So that's the innate response.
We're not really going to say much about that.
Uh,
here,
there's a little bit about it in the book and if you go on to study immunology,
you'll learn that this is one of the most important and rapidly evolving areas
of,
uh,
the study of immunology.
And in fact,
the people who have been most important in,
um,
in understanding how the innate immune system works.
Our people here at Yale,
um,
that
the immune system that we're used to thinking about is called the adaptive
immune system.
The adaptive immune system.
And the adaptive immune system does just that.
It changes or adapt in response to an insult or a threat.
And,
uh,
so this is the kind of immune response that gets activated only when it's needed
and then it will stay activated for some period of time and eventually disappear
again.
And there are two types of adaptive immune responses,
uh,
and they're called humoral immune responses.
And humoral,
uh,
comes from the term humors.
Uh,
and it used to be that we thought about a disease as being caused by the balance
of humor is in our blood.
You could have good humors and you could have bad humors.
And if those humors,
whatever they are got out of balance,
then you've got sick if you had too many bad ones compared to good ones.
And so humoral refers to immunity in the blood and it's,
it's um,
it's immunity that's in the blood in the form of antibodies.
And we're going to talk a lot about antibodies over the next,
uh,
week or so.
But antibodies are specialized that as you know,
are designed to bind to antigens or foreign molecules inside the body.
I'll say more about that in a minute,
but the humoral immune response involves antibody production and antibodies are
made by a subset of cells called [inaudible] cells.
Okay.
B cells.
The other part of the adaptive immune system is the cell mediated immune system.
And this is an immune system.
That's where that doesn't involve antibodies but involves cells that are
activated in response to a Foreign Antigen and that utilize cellular means to
get rid of it.
And usually the cellular means that they get rid of is that instead of an
antibody being produced,
you activate a population of cells that will specifically go and hunt down the
foreign,
the foreign antigen or more commonly cells that contain the foreign antigen.
Now why do you need a cell mediated immune response if you have an antibody
response?
We'll talk about that in a few minutes,
but we're going to,
one of the reasons why,
uh,
you'll see why sell mute mediated responses are important is because antigens
can appear in your body in different ways and the way that they appear in your
body tells the immune system something about where they came from.
And uh,
we'll,
we'll learn more about that in a moment.
But basically it allows the immune system to distinguish between viral and
bacterial pathogens and respond appropriately depending on the type of pathogen
that's there.
So the main effector cells in cell mediated immunity,
the t cells that do the main business are called t cells.
Now t cells are also involved in humoral immunity,
but they're not the end result.
Right?
The end result and humoral immunity is B cells producing antibodies.
The end result or the molecules that carry out the function in a cell mediated
immunity are,
are t cells either,
um,
either,
okay,
let me talk about different types of t cells in a moment,
but either cells that are called CD four positive cells or CD eight positive
cells.
So why do you have these different kinds of responses and what the reason is
that that because of the ways that different microorganisms,
uh,
take,
um,
the ways the different micro organisms reproduce and damage cells and tissue
within your body,
you need different ways to respond to them effectively.
So think for a minute about what happens if you get infected with the virus.
Now,
a virus is not capable of reproducing on its own.
So if you,
if you've got a virus into your body somehow and it didn't enter any of
yourselves,
it would cause no damage,
right?
Because it could not reproduce and it's reproduction of the virus and passage of
that virus onto new cells,
which causes the problems with disease that we associate,
right?
They often kill the cells that they,
in fact,
and that's a problem with viruses.
So a virus isn't troublesome until it infects a host cell and when it infects a
host cell,
it becomes troublesome because it takes over some of the host machinery for DNA
synthesis,
transcription and translation and starts making more viruses.
And this happens largely in the cytoplasm of the cell.
So how is your immune system going to recognize that this virus is there causing
bad results?
If it's living inside of a cell and doing all this business inside a cell where
antibodies can't get to it,
right?
Antibodies are outside of cells circulating in your extra cellular fluid.
Well,
the way that your immune system recognizes it is that all of the cells of our
body express a molecule on their surface.
A membrane protein called the MHC,
one complex and MHC one is a word.
MHC stands for major histocompatibility complex and it's one of the things that
distinguishes my cells from yourselves,
from your parents cells,
from your roommate cells,
is that each one of ourselves,
one of the things that distinguishes them is the kind of MHC molecules that all
of my cells make.
It's what makes my cells,
my cells and your cells,
your cells.
And it's the reason why you can't do organ transplants between people that
aren't immunologically matched.
Because if you take an organ from one person and put it in another,
if their MHC molecules don't match,
then the immune system recognizes the immune system of the host recognizes,
ah,
this is not the right MHC for me.
And the immune system tries to destroy those cells.
So one of the functions of MHC is to indicate which cells belong inside your
body,
which cells don't.
The other thing that it does is that when a virus is inside these cells making
its proteins,
some of those proteins get processed or digested into small fragments that are
themselves antigens.
And those antigens get expressed together with MHC one.
So one of the other things that MHC one does in addition to marketing yourselves
as your own,
is that it's capable of making combinations with all the different molecules
that are present inside the cell
and expressing them on the surface and sort of showing them to the outside
world,
right?
And it's showing them to the outside world in combination with MHC one.
Okay.
And the immune system,
some cells of the immune system in particular,
this class of t cells called CD eight cells have receptors which recognize MHC
one,
okay?
And they're capable of recognizing MHC one together with foreign antigens.
And when these CD eight t cells see your MHC one together with an antigen that
doesn't belong in you,
it creates a immune response.
And the immune response is directed at killing this cell.
And the notion is if there's something foreign that's being produced inside this
cell,
then that cell must have been corrupted in some way and it has to be getting rid
of,
it could have been corrupted because of virus was inside of it.
So it was making foreign proteins and that's making the cell look foreign
because some of that foreign protein is on the surface with MHC one,
it could be foreign because it's become malignant.
Maybe it got mutated and it's making the wrong kinds of proteins,
right?
Cancer cells often do that.
And so those wrong proteins get presented on MHC one and your immune system can
kill the cell because it's a tumor cell,
right?
So this is a way for the immune system to recognize things that are going wrong
inside itself,
protected from antibodies.
Um,
other kinds of micro organisms reproduce and cause tissue damage in a different
way.
If you get bacteria under your skin,
right?
If you get a cut and somehow that cut gets bacteria gets inside there,
the bacteria can reproduce on their own,
right?
They're,
they're fully functional organisms that can reproduce on their own and they can
start growing outside of any cell.
And that's what they do.
They live extracellularly well,
you're a Nate immune system,
tries to get rid of them.
The innate immune system composed of neutrophils and macrophages.
These are cells that are crawling around your body all the time,
ready to eat bacteria.
And when they do that,
they can actually engulf the bacteria in a process called phagocytosis and break
the bacteria down into,
um,
into antigens.
And then those antigens get expressed with Mhc,
just like they did in all the other cells inside the host.
But particular cells of the innate immune system have a different kind of MHC
called MHC two.
Okay.
And when t cells recognize a foreign antigen that's combined with MHC two,
they know that that antigen must've come from one of these professional,
okay.
Phagocytic cells digesting bacteria or some other extra cellular,
um,
invader.
Right?
And because this antigen gets expressed in the context of Mhc to your immune
system responds differently.
Okay.
Now there's a lot of words here,
right?
I mean there's a lot of words,
there's a lot of abbreviations,
there's a lot of players.
And the details are not particularly important to us.
Some of them in your book,
and I hope you read about them cause it's really interesting,
but the main points are that for us here,
that this is a very elaborate form of cell communication that is,
has the same essential characteristics that we talked about last time in that
there are receptors,
okay.
That are presenting signals which now other cells receive.
Okay.
Those receptors are more complicated than the ones we thought about before.
The logins are more complicated than the ones we thought about before.
And the reason for that complexity is because your immune system needs to be
able to respond to all the potential foreign invaders that we could encounter.
Okay.
It's not just a limited number of things that might happen,
right?
And so it's evolved these sort of,
uh,
mechanisms,
in order to allow it to respond to a wide variety of,
uh,
of potential molecules and to respond in the same way,
mmm.
In a coordinated way that somehow knows where those foreign molecules came from.
Okay.
And importantly,
it's able to distinguish foreign molecules from your own molecules,
right?
So read about this,
but please don't worry about all of the details because the details aren't so
important for what we're going to talk about.
And he says that and then he shows an even more detailed picture.
Um,
but um,
what I want to show you on this slide is just the simple part of it.
I talked last time about mh and the last slide about MHC one.
So this is a cell that's infected with a microorganism,
is infected with the virus.
Let's say it's infected with influenza virus.
So that virus is reproducing inside cells of your respiratory tract.
You've got the flu,
you've got influenza in your upper respiratory tract,
your cells are making more influenza that gets,
that gets presented in the context of Mhc one on cells within your body.
And immune cells recognize it and they recognize it by a very special form of
receptor ligand interaction where the ligature is MHC one with the foreign
antigen and the receptor is a receptor called the t cell receptor complex.
Yeah.
T cell receptor complexes able to recognize on uh,
um,
on
one population of t cells able to recognize MHC one,
uh,
together with foreign peptides on another type of T-cell,
able to recognize MHC two with,
uh,
with,
other types of foreign antigens.
Okay.
What happens when that recognition takes place is that your immune system gets
activated and the activation that happens usually involves two things.
It involves proliferation,
which we talked about last week.
So when the right signal is received right,
the right t cell finds your host's cell with a foreign virus in it,
the first thing that happens is that this t cell becomes activated and it starts
reproducing,
making more copies of itself.
So reproduction,
proliferation,
cell growth happens and then those cells become more differentiated.
They become more mature and they mature into,
in this case,
they mature into cytotoxic cells.
Okay.
They mature and cytotoxic means cyto cell,
toxic killing.
They mature into cells that are capable of killing other cells.
Okay?
But you don't want to generate a lot of cells that just start killing every cell
inside your body,
right?
So here's where the,
where the intelligence of the immune system comes in,
is that these cytotoxic t cells that are generated only kill cells that have
this signal on it.
They only kill cells that have the signal which stimulated them,
okay?
Right?
So they don't start killing all the cells in your respiratory system.
They only kill the cells that are harboring the virus.
They know that these cells are harboring the virus because those cells have
foreign antigens on their MHC one.
Okay?
Does that make sense?
Uh,
in the same way,
uh,
cells get activated,
but these are different cells.
These are t helper cells that get activated by MHC two
helper cells don't become tied cytotoxic cells,
but they help B cells become antigen producing antibody producing cells.
So this kind of recognition leads to,
in effect,
what's the effect cell killing.
This kind of recognition leads to another effect.
What's the effect?
Antibody production.
Why are antibodies useful for bacteria?
Because bacteria are outside of cells and when antibodies bind to them,
they can neutralize them.
They can't always neutralize viruses because the viruses are predominantly
inside cells.
Right?
That's why you need two kinds of immune responses.
We're going to talk a lot about antibodies.
We're going to talk about antibodies in a section and I want it to at the end of
the course,
um,
uh,
one of our last section meeting every year we get together and we talk about
which sections did you think were useful and which parts,
which sections were not so useful.
The section where you do today,
it's always the most popular section of the year.
You'll know why after the section.
But um,
and you can tell me afterwards if you think you figured out why,
but it involves thinking about antibodies and how to use antibodies in
technology.
Well,
let me just say for the rest of the time,
where do antibody has come from?
Naturally they come from B cells.
They come from B cells that are activated with a specific antigen and the
antibodies that are produced from these B cells are also specific for the
antigen.
An Antigen expressed in the context of MHC stimulates your immune system.
One of the results of that stimulation is that B cells,
a particular subset of B cells gets activated.
What happens when they're activated?
As they start to reproduce,
they make more and more and more B cells and those B cells also mature.
They differentiate and that's what's shown on this slide here is the
differentiation of those immature B cells into mature B cells.
What do immature B cells do?
They just wait.
They wait for their time.
They wait until you are in danger from a particular antigen.
When you get exposed to that particular antigen,
they say,
I'm on,
it's my time.
They differentiate.
They make many copies of themselves and the,
I'm sorry,
they proliferate.
They make many copies of themselves and then they differentiate into antibody
production machines and the antibodies they make are all specific to the antigen
that stimulated them.
So that's shown here.
A B cell gets stimulated,
matures into an antibody producing factory.
Antibodies look like this.
They're big,
uh,
proteins.
If you looked at them under a microscope or if you looked at him and cartoons,
they're shaped like the letter y and uh,
one part of them is all common.
The parts at the end of the wise are,
are,
are variable.
What's variable about them is that they bind to a specific antigen.
They bind to the antigen that stimulated their production.
So I have a bacteria infection,
stimulates my immune system.
I start making antibodies that bind to an antigen specific to that bacteria,
right?
Well,
help me against other bacteria,
but only against the one that I've got.
How do they recognize it?
Because at the end of the Y,
there's a special region of the antibody,
the antigen binding region that is highly tuned for binding to the antigen that
stimulated,
yeah,
dumb.
And we're going to talk more about now how to use antibodies in section today.
One of the beautiful things about anti antibodies is that one,
your immune system is able to make antibodies against all the thousands,
10,000 hundred thousand different pathogens that you'll come into contact with
in your lifetime.
And so our bodies are capable of making antibodies that are tuned for all the
potential antigens that we come into contact with.
That's amazing,
right?
That we,
that we have this capacity to respond and you respond only when needed,
right?
From a technological perspective,
antibodies are incredible tools because antibodies are molecules that are
specifically designed to bind to a particular antigen or a particular chemical.
Okay?
It's something just happened.
So,
so what if you could manufacture antibodies?
What if you could manufacture antibodies?
Don't worry about how they work in the immune system,
but what if you could manufacture antibodies,
then you could make a chemical and antibody that is capable of binding to a
specific other chemical.
Okay.
And you could use that for things and it turns out you can use that for lots of
things.
You can use it to detect the presence of small amounts of chemicals anywhere.
And we'll talk about how to use antibodies in that fashion,
um,
later,
uh,
today.
Uh,
in section
questions,
one last word of encouragement.
As I say it again,
there's a lot of words in this chapter.
There's a lot of concepts,
uh,
focus on the things that I talked about in class,
not the details,
the basic concepts,
focus on the concepts of receptors and lie gans.
I wanted to show you this slide here on the homework.
Um,
I realized that this,
that this I'm thinking about antigen antibody combinations and the mathematics
of how strongly an antibody binds to a specific antigen is maybe something
that's new to you.
And there's,
uh,
this,
this diagram comes directly from your book,
from one of the boxes in the book,
which described how you analyze antibody interactions.
If you have questions about this,
I hope that you've already,
if you have questions taken advantage of the teaching fellows or come up after
class,
I'd be happy to try to answer your questions now if you have time as well.
Okay.
In section.